WORKFLOWS.md, before:

# Motivating Workflows

## Notes

* This is intended to work namely in Bazel. You may run this outside of Bazel, via `bazel-bin/`, but due to verbosity, it's recommended to use the Bazel command.
* Since this is intended to run under Bazel (`download` out of necessity, `upload` for the reasons listed above), we must specify absolute paths.
    * This can be done via the shorthand `~+` in `bash`, or via `${PWD}` or `$(pwd)`.

## Configuration

* Inspect the configuration in `tools/external_data/girder.gitconfig`. This is for the repository.
* Inspect `tools/external_data/girder.gitconfig.user.tpl`. This is a template, which should live in `~/.girder.gitconfig`. Ensure you add the appropriate API key so that you have authorized access.

## Start Drafting a Large File

Say you're in `/data`, and want to author `dragon.obj` to be used in a Bazel
test.

1. Add a Bazel target for this file indicating that it's external data and that you're in the process of developing the file. In `/data/BUILD.bazel`:

        external_data(
            file = "dragon.obj",
            mode = "devel",  # Delete once you've uploaded.
        )

    NOTE: Under the hood, this simply uses `exports_files(...)` to make the file a proper target, using the same name. This is useful for later points in time, when you want to edit a file that has already been versioned.

2. Write a test, e.g. `//test:inspect_dragon`, that consumes this file:

        sh_test(
            name = "inspect_dragon",
            ...,
            args = ["data/dragon.obj"],
            data = ["//data:dragon.obj"],
            tags = ["external_data"],  # Specify so that we can discriminate.
        )

    Run the test to ensure it works as expected.

## Upload the File for Deployment

1. Run the `upload` script given the absolute path of the desired file:

        cd data
        touch dragon.obj
        bazel run //toos/external_data:upload -- ~+/dragon.obj

    If the file does not already exist on the desired server, this creates
    `~+/dragon.obj.sha512`, and will add the path of the file relative to this
    repository (`/data/dragon.obj`) for server-side versioning.

2. Update `/data/BUILD.bazel` to indicate that you're now using the uploaded version (this tells Bazel to expect `~+/dragon.obj.sha512`):

        external_data(
            file = "dragon.obj",
        )

3. To test if Bazel can download this file, execute this in `/data`:

        bazel build :dragon.obj

    This should have downloaded, cached, and exposed this file in Bazel's workspace.
    Now run `//test:inspect_dragon` (which should use Bazel's cached version) and ensure this works.

4. Now commit the `*.sha512` file in Git.

## Edit the File Later

Let's say you've removed `dragon.obj` from `/data`, but a month later you wish to revise it. To update the file:

1. Download the corresponding SHA file:

        cd data
        bazel run //tools/external_data:download -- ~+/dragon.obj.sha512

2. Change `/data/BUILD.bazel` back to development mode:

        external_data(
            file = "dragon.obj",
            mode = "devel",  # Add this line back in.
        )

3. Make the appropriate changes.

4. Follow the steps in "Upload the File for Deployment".

## Use `*.sha512` groups in `BUILD.bazel`

For groups of large data files, you could specify individual Bazel `external_data` targets, or explicitly list the files in  `external_data_group` with an explicit list of files.

However, if you have a large set of `*.sha512` files, it may be easier to use the workspace's directory structure to glob these files; you could not use `${file}` without the suffix because this file would not exist normally, hence we can glob based on `*.sha512`.

As an example in `/data`:

    external_data_sha_group(
        name = "meshes",
        sha_files = glob(['**/*.obj.sha512']),
    )

You may now use `:meshes` in tests to get all of these files.

If you wish to expose all of these files within the Bazel build sandbox, you may execute:

    bazel build :meshes

NOTE: This interface will cache the files under `~/.cache/bazel-girder`, and thus you will not need to re-download these files.

## Editing Files in a `*.sha512` group

You may also use `mode = "devel"` in `external_data_group` or `exteranl_data_sha_gorup` if you wish to edit *all* of the files. If you do wnat this, you must have downloaded all of the files to your workspace (as shown down below).

If you only want one file, consider the structure mentioned below:

    external_data_sha_group(
        name = "meshes_nondevel",
        sha_files = glob(
            include = ['**/*.obj.sha512'],
            exclude = ['robot/to_edit.obj'],
        ),
    )
    external_data(
        name = "robot/to_edit.obj",
        mode = "devel",
    )
    filegroup(
        name = "meshes",
        srcs = [
            ":meshes_nondevel",
            ":robot/to_edit.obj",
        ],
    )

You may make this more compact using `sha_files_devel`:

    external_data_sha_group(
        name = "meshes",
        sha_files = glob(['**/*.obj.sha512']),
        sha_files_devel = "robot/to_edit.obj",
    )


## Download a Set of Files

If you wish to download *all* files of a given extension at the specified revision under a certain directory, you may use `find` (and ensure that you use `~+` so that it returns absolute paths):

    find ~+ -name '*.obj.sha512' | xargs bazel run //tools/external_data:download --

For each `${file}.sha512` that is found, the file will be downloaded to `${file}`.

NOTE: This will fail if one of the outputs already exists; you must specify `--force` to enable overwriting.

As above, these files are cached.

## Download One File to a Specific Location

This is used in Bazel via `macros.bzl`:

    bazel run //tools/external_data:download -- ${file}.sha512 --output ${file}

## Download Files and Expose as Symlinks (Do Not Copy)

If you just need easy read-only access to files (and don't want to deal with Bazel's paths), you can use `--symlink_from_cache`:

    bazel run //tools/external_data:download -- --symlink_from_cache ~+/*.sha512

## TODO

* Make `//tools/external_data` an actual external in Bazel, possibly something like `bazel-external-data`, such that we could do:

        bazel run @external_data//:download -- ~+/${file}.sha512
        # OR
        girder-cli git download ${file}.sha512

        bazel run @external_data//:upload -- ~+/file
        # OR
        girder-cli git download ${file}

* If possible, merge scripts into `girder_client` if appropriate. (Though it may be too heavily Bazel-based.)
* Revisit the use of `git annex` as a frontend with more complex merging mechanisms.

Commit message:

Going to consider simplifying groups interface...

WORKFLOWS.md, after:

# Motivating Workflows

## Notes

* This is intended to work namely in Bazel. You may run this outside of Bazel, via `bazel-bin/`, but due to verbosity, it's recommended to use the Bazel command.
* Since this is intended to run under Bazel (`download` out of necessity, `upload` for the reasons listed above), we must specify absolute paths.
    * This can be done via the shorthand `~+` in `bash`, or via `${PWD}` or `$(pwd)`.

## Configuration

* Inspect the configuration in `tools/external_data/girder.gitconfig`. This is for the repository.
* Inspect `tools/external_data/girder.gitconfig.user.tpl`. This is a template, which should live in `~/.girder.gitconfig`. Ensure you add the appropriate API key so that you have authorized access.

## Start Drafting a Large File

Say you're in `/data`, and want to author `dragon.obj` to be used in a Bazel
test.

1. Add a Bazel target for this file indicating that it's external data and that you're in the process of developing the file. In `/data/BUILD.bazel`:

        external_data(
            file = "dragon.obj",
            mode = "devel",  # Delete once you've uploaded.
        )

    NOTE: Under the hood, this simply uses `exports_files(...)` to make the file a proper target, using the same name. This is useful for later points in time, when you want to edit a file that has already been versioned.

2. Write a test, e.g. `//test:inspect_dragon`, that consumes this file:

        sh_test(
            name = "inspect_dragon",
            ...,
            args = ["data/dragon.obj"],
            data = ["//data:dragon.obj"],
            tags = ["external_data"],  # Specify so that we can discriminate.
        )

    Run the test to ensure it works as expected.

## Upload the File for Deployment

1. Run the `upload` script given the absolute path of the desired file:

        cd data
        touch dragon.obj
        bazel run //toos/external_data:upload -- ~+/dragon.obj

    If the file does not already exist on the desired server, this creates
    `~+/dragon.obj.sha512`, and will add the path of the file relative to this
    repository (`/data/dragon.obj`) for server-side versioning.

2. Update `/data/BUILD.bazel` to indicate that you're now using the uploaded version (this tells Bazel to expect `~+/dragon.obj.sha512`):

        external_data(
            file = "dragon.obj",
        )

3. To test if Bazel can download this file, execute this in `/data`:

        bazel build :dragon.obj

    This should have downloaded, cached, and exposed this file in Bazel's workspace.
    Now run `//test:inspect_dragon` (which should use Bazel's cached version) and ensure this works.

4. Now commit the `*.sha512` file in Git.

## Edit the File Later

Let's say you've removed `dragon.obj` from `/data`, but a month later you wish to revise it. To update the file:

1. Download the corresponding SHA file:

        cd data
        bazel run //tools/external_data:download -- ~+/dragon.obj.sha512

2. Change `/data/BUILD.bazel` back to development mode:

        external_data(
            file = "dragon.obj",
            mode = "devel",  # Add this line back in.
        )

3. Make the appropriate changes.

4. Follow the steps in "Upload the File for Deployment".

## Use `*.sha512` groups in `BUILD.bazel`

For groups of large data files, you could specify individual Bazel `external_data` targets, or explicitly list the files in  `external_data_group` with an explicit list of files.

However, if you have a large set of `*.sha512` files, it may be easier to use the workspace's directory structure to glob these files; you could not use `${file}` without the suffix because this file would not exist normally, hence we can glob based on `*.sha512`.

As an example in `/data`:

    external_data_sha_group(
        name = "meshes",
        sha_files = glob(['**/*.obj.sha512']),
    )

You may now use `:meshes` in tests to get all of these files.

If you wish to expose all of these files within the Bazel build sandbox, you may execute:

    bazel build :meshes

NOTE: This interface will cache the files under `~/.cache/bazel-girder`, and thus you will not need to re-download these files.

## Editing Files in a `*.sha512` group

You may also use `mode = "devel"` in `external_data_group` or `external_data_sha_gorup` if you wish to edit *all* of the files. If you do want this, you must have downloaded all of the files to your workspace (as shown down below).

If you want to edit a certain file in a group, then you can make two upstream targets, non-devel and devel, and link this as a `filegroup` to the original filegroup.

This is handled by `external_data_sha_group(..., files_devel)` 

    external_data_sha_group(
        name = "meshes_nondevel",
        sha_files = glob(
            include = ['**/*.obj.sha512'],
            exclude = ['robot/to_edit.obj'],
        ),
    )
    external_data(
        name = "robot/to_edit.obj",
        mode = "devel",
    )
    filegroup(
        name = "meshes",
        srcs = [
            ":meshes_nondevel",
            ":robot/to_edit.obj",
        ],
    )

You may make this more compact using `sha_files_devel`:

    external_data_sha_group(
        name = "meshes",
        sha_files = glob(['**/*.obj.sha512']),
        sha_files_devel = "robot/to_edit.obj",
    )


## Download a Set of Files

If you wish to download *all* files of a given extension at the specified revision under a certain directory, you may use `find` (and ensure that you use `~+` so that it returns absolute paths):

    find ~+ -name '*.obj.sha512' | xargs bazel run //tools/external_data:download --

For each `${file}.sha512` that is found, the file will be downloaded to `${file}`.

NOTE: This will fail if one of the outputs already exists; you must specify `--force` to enable overwriting.

As above, these files are cached.

## Download One File to a Specific Location

This is used in Bazel via `macros.bzl`:

    bazel run //tools/external_data:download -- ${file}.sha512 --output ${file}

## Download Files and Expose as Symlinks (Do Not Copy)

If you just need easy read-only access to files (and don't want to deal with Bazel's paths), you can use `--symlink_from_cache`:

    bazel run //tools/external_data:download -- --symlink_from_cache ~+/*.sha512

## TODO

* Make `//tools/external_data` an actual external in Bazel, possibly something like `bazel-external-data`, such that we could do:

        bazel run @external_data//:download -- ~+/${file}.sha512
        # OR
        girder-cli git download ${file}.sha512

        bazel run @external_data//:upload -- ~+/file
        # OR
        girder-cli git download ${file}

* If possible, merge scripts into `girder_client` if appropriate. (Though it may be too heavily Bazel-based.)
* Revisit the use of `git annex` as a frontend with more complex merging mechanisms.
